The files in the "maintain" directory of the PCRE source contain data, scripts, 
and programs that are used for the maintenance of PCRE, but do not form part of
the PCRE distribution tarballs.

132html         A Perl script that converts a .1 or .3 man page into HTML. It
                is called from MakeRelease. It "knows" the relevant troff 
                constructs that are used in the PCRE man pages.

Builducptable   A Perl script that creates the contents of the ucptable.h file
                from two Unicode data files, which themselves are downloaded
                from the Unicode web site. Run this script in the "maintain" 
                directory.
                
CleanTxt        A Perl script that cleans up the output of "nroff -man" by
                removing backspaces and other redundant text so as to produce
                a readable .txt file. It is called from MakeRelease.
                
Detrail         A Perl script that removes trailing spaces from files. It is
                called from MakeRelease.

Index.html      A file that is copied as index.html into the doc/html 
                directory when the HTML documentation is being built. It works
                like this so that doc/html can be deleted and re-created from
                scratch.
                
MakeRelease     My script for creating a new release. It processes the 
                documentation man pages into .text and HTML formats before 
                creating tarballs and putting them in the Releases directory.
                
Tech.Notes      Some notes about the internals of the PCRE code.   
               
Unicode.tables  The files in this directory, Scripts.txt and UnicodeData.txt, 
                were downloaded from the Unicode web site. They contain 
                information about Unicode characters and scripts.

ucptest.c       A short C program for testing the Unicode property functions in
                pcre_ucp_searchfuncs.c, mainly useful after rebuilding the
                Unicode property table. Compile and run this in the "maintain" 
                directory.
            
ucptestdata     A directory containing two files, testinput1 and testoutput1,
                to use in conjunction with the ucptest program.
            
utf8.c          A short, freestanding C program for converting a Unicode code
                point into a sequence of bytes in the UTF-8 encoding, and vice
                versa. If its argument is a hex number such as 0x1234, it 
                outputs a list of the equivalent UTF-8 bytes. If its argument 
                is sequence of concatenated UTF-8 bytes (e.g. e188b4) it treats 
                them as a UTF-8 character and outputs the equivalent code point 
                in hex. 
                
When there is a new release of Unicode, the files in Unicode.tables must be 
refreshed from the web site, and the Buildupctable script can then be run to 
generate a new version of ucptable.h. The ucptest program can be used to check 
that the resulting table works properly, using the data files in ucptestdata to 
check a number of test characters. 
             
**** 
